May 15, 2020

One of my favorite Vonnegut novels. This book is an aggressively decadent celebration of the idea that humans, with our huge sophistocated brains, are NOT in fact the pinnacle of evolution. That "lower" animals are far smarter and better suited than we are.

In 'Galapagos', a nature cruise of the Galapagos islands is slated to sail from Guyaquil, Ecuador. Due to rising political tensions in Ecuador, many of the cruise's guests cancel, leaving only a few passengers. Predictably, the cruise itself is canceled, but the cancelling of the cruise causes violent upheaval among impoverished rioters in the city of Guyaquil who take the cruise's cancellation as permission to loot the ship and hotel which were chartered for the cruise. At this critical point in the story, war is declared between Ecuador and Peru, causing the miniscule guest list - along with some impoverished natives - to take refuge on the ship. When a missile is dropped on a nearby ship as an act of war, the cruise ship becomes unmoored; ultimately, the captian of the cruise ship decides to try and sail the ship to a facility on the Galapagos islands so they can be distanced from the violence on land and so a ship passenger in the middle of a heart attack can be treated at the hospital there.

The ship is run aground on the wrong island and won't restart, leaving the 10-ish (Mary Hepburn, (a pregnant) Hisako, Selena, the captain, and the 6 indigenous Ecuadorian girls) marooned. The human population on the rest of the world is annihilated by a parasite which makes women infertile, and because of the Peru-Ecuador war, the cruise ship is considered lost and so no attempts are made to rescue the stranded survivors. Over the next million years, the descendants of the maroon survivors evolve into seal-like animals, with much smaller brains and flippers instead of hands. By the judgement of the narrator, they are much happier this way and, unlike their homo sapien ancestors circa 1986, are not on a crash course for planetary destruction.

Speaking of the narrator, the narrator of this book is the ghost of Leon Trout, the son of scifi writer Kilgore Trout and shipwright who worked on building the ship which drives the plot of the book. He was decapitated accidentally during the construction of the ship.


overall, the plot of the book is pretty simple. An intricately-timed series of events lead to the marooning of a few people on an island, which leads to the evolution of humans. The meat of the book is in its musings of how evolution bestowed upon us large brains that very often make us unhappy. Maybe just like the fatalism of SH5, this book's grim outlook on humanity is mentally unhealthy for me.
