May 21, 2020

I got this book from [the David Bowie reading list](https://web.archive.org/web/20160111175933/https://www.davidbowie.com/news/bowie-s-top-100-books-complete-list-52061).

I've read this book once before - in high school, but for some reason at that time my reading comprehension of this book was very low. I misunderstood the climax so badly that I thought Gatsby killed himself... I didn't realize he was murdered!! Re-reading it now, I would guess that its because the author's attitude, which is cynical and uncharitable towards the bad behavior of others, struck me as really unrelatable, being the unreasonably good-willed teenager that I was. Re-reading it more carefully and as an adult, I gave this book an amount of attention that's closer to what it deserves and was able to more closely follow the contours of the plot, but I think I still can't see the big picture clearly enough to really get it.

#### Chapter 1
The book takes place in 1922 and is narrated in the first-person by Nick Carraway, a 20something of middle-to-upper class background who has just moved to the outskirts of New York City so he can become a bond broker. The area that he has moved to is called "west egg", a small peninsula off of long island, about 10 miles to the east of Brooklyn and 50 miles to the west of the Hamptons. West egg is a very affluent area and is inhabited by people with "new money". His modest house is a relative hovel, sitting right next to the outsized mansion owned by Mr. Gatsby. In the first scene of the book, Nick goes to visit his (second?) cousin, Daisy Buchanan, who lives with her husband just across a small bay from Nick in an adjacent peninsula called "east egg", where people with "old money" tend to live. Daisy is charming, confident, and funny, and the narrator describes her in a way that seems romantic (even though they're cousins, gross). Her husband Tom is a manly-man among men, and a bit of raging racist. As they are enjoying a high class dinner on the Buchanan's porch with friend and sports celebrity Jordan Baker, Tom is called away from the table by the butler for a phone call. Daisy and Jordan bitterly intone to Nick that it's probably Tom's mistress, whose existance is a badly hidden secret.

#### Chapter 2
Later on, Tom Buchanan invites Nick to come to the city with him, so that they can party with Tom's extramarital girlfriend, Myrtle. In a show of, I guess machismo, Tom stops off at an auto repair shop that his girlfriend's husband owns and subtly belittles him over a car deal they have. during a brief moment when the husband steps away to take care of some business, Tom tells Myrtle (who is in the auto repair as her husband is the owner) to meet him downtown that afternoon. I can only guess that Tom gets some perverse pleasure in emasculating the auto shop owner by belittling him and then banging his wife right under his nose. Is it because Tom is insecure in himself that he needs to do this? Tom and Nick meet Myrtle at a train station in Manhattan(?), where they take a taxi together down to Tom and Myrtle's love-nest apartment in NYC that has been purchased with Tom's majestically deep pockets. On the way, Myrtle makes an impulse purchase of a puppy being sold by a street vendor, who sells puppies (pretty damn weird). At Tom and Myrtle's apartment, Myrtle's sister comes over and the neighbors from the downstairs apartment come up, and they sit, drink, and gossip, telling Nick about Myrtle's husband, who she begins to scorn once she 'figures out' that he's kinda middle-lower class. After a few hours, around 10 pm, Tom and Myrtle start to argue, and Myrtle shouts Daisy's name over and over, leading Tom to punch her hard in the face. The guests quickly and awkwardly file out. Nick ends up getting home at around 5am.

#### Chapter 3
Gatsby throws comically lavish parties at his mansion next door to Nick's house nearly every weekend. Nick finds himself invited to one of Gatsby's parties, a highly unusual occurance as Gatsby never invites people, he just lets them show up. Nick is overwhelmed by the atmosphere, and feels a huge sense of relief when he recognizes Jordan Baker, Daisy's friend. She's glad to see him and they give each other companionship for the duration of the party. There are quite a few examples of very superficial behavior: one of my favorites from the book is a man in Gatsby's library who points out that Gatsby has a lot of books, but the pages of all the books are uncut, meaning that Gatsby hasn't read any of them: it's just an act. Near the end of the party, Nick finds himself talking with someone who was the same division as him during WW I. This turns out to be Gatsby himself, who asks to speak to Jordan privately. Jordan and Gatsby talk for almost an hour, and when she comes back, she tells Nick that Gatsby has revealed some huge personal secret to her, but she can't tell Nick. As the party dissipates, Gatsby invites Nick to come boating with him the following morning. As Nick is leaving, some drunk drivers leaving Gatsby's house get into a small car wreck that injures no-one but destroys their cars.

A few weeks pass, and Nick and Jordan start to see each other romantically, although Nick has a girlfriend 'back home' (Indianapolis?) that he intends to break things off with. He consciously limits the intensity of his relationship with Jordan until his previous relationship is "tactfully broken off".

#### Chapter 4
Nick recounts the vast swath of rich, superficial guests that Gatsby has hosted in the couple of months that Nick has lived on West Egg.

Gatsby calls on Nick so they can go out to lunch together in New York City. In the car ride down, Gatsby nervously tells Nick that he came into wealth through inheritance and was educated at Oxford, which Nick suspects to be a lie. Gatsby barely convinces him by showing Nick a medal he won in WWI for valor in battle. Gatsby tells Nick that he has a "big favor to ask of him" later that afternoon, which is why Nick is being treated to Gatsby's personal history. Gatsby and Nick have lunch with a business partner of Gatsby's who is mixed up in some shady dealings, having fixed the 1919 world series. Gatsby abruptly leaves when Nick spots Tom Buchanan and goes over to say hi to him.

That afternoon, Nick goes out with Jordan Baker, who tells him that Gatsby and Daisy used to be in love, nearly 5 years ago in 1917, but their courtship was cut short by WWI. Daisy married Tom while Gatsby was at war, but it was with great reluctance; Gatsby sent her a letter the day before her wedding, and in response she got completely trashed on booze, threw away the $350,000 (in 1920 money) string of pearls that Tom bought for her, and laid in bed, sobbing, telling Jordan that "Daisy's change' her mind". When she sobers up, she goes through with the wedding, and Tom starts cheating on her almost immediately. When he gets back from WWI, Gatsby buys his huge mansion right across the bay from Daisy and Tom's house, and starts throwing parties just to get her attention. Gatsby has realized that Nick and Jordan are his way back to Daisy; Jordan tells Nick that Gatsby wants Nick to invite Daisy to his house for tea so that there will be a pretense for Gatsby and Daisy to meet by chance, as if they just happen to be 2 friends of the same person (Nick).

#### Chapter 5
Nick gets home late at night and talks with Gatsby, who's decided to turn on all of the lights in his enormous mansion, maybe so Daisy will see it from across the bay. Gatsby offers Nick a part in an unspecified shady business deal (people have speculated that Gatsby's money is from bootlegging), but Nick declines; Gatsby and Nick work out a time for Daisy to come over for tea.

The following day, Gatsby nervously hangs around Nick's house for hours before Daisy's arrival. When she finally gets there, their reunion is very awkward. The normally super confident Gatsby is overcome with anexity and tries to leave before Nick takes him aside and tells him he's "acting like a little boy". Nick comes up with a flimsy excuse to go outside, leaving Gatsby and Daisy alone for about 30 minutes; when Nick returns, a complete transformation has taken place, Gatsby and Daisy are very at ease with each other; Gatsby is positively radiant and Daisy's voice is "aching... [with] unexpected joy".

Gatsby excitedly drags Daisy to his enormous house and shows her around, presumably a moment he has fantasized about for 2 or 3 years. Daisy is awestruck. Nick thinks about how perhaps some lustre has vanished from Gatsby's life now that Daisy's arm is looped around his.

> Possibly it had occurred to him that the collosal significance of that [green lamplight at the end of Daisy's dock] had vanished forever.... His count of enchanted objects had diminished by one.

To me, this is one of the most profound moments of the book, a somber meditation on the gap between striving and achieving, between wanting and having, between the journey and the destination.

> As I went over to say good-by I saw that the expression of bewilderment had come back into Gatsby's face, as though a faint doubt had occurred to him as to the quality of his present happiness. Almost five years! There must have been moments even that afternoon when Daisy tumbled short of his dreams - not through her own fault, but because of the colossal vitality of his illusion... No amount of fire or freshness can challenge what a man will store up in his ghostly heart.

#### Chapter 6
Nick relates a bit more of Gatsby's personal history to us. Gatsby came from a poor family and, on a whim at the age of 17, apprenticed himself to a rich (and maybe eccentric?) yachter named Dan Cody and started calling himself Jay Gatsby instead of James Gatz. Gatsby sails the world for a few years before Cody dies - supposedly at the hand of an estranged wife.

A few weeks after the lunch with Gatsby, through some social posturing that I couldn't follow, Tom Buchanan finds himself briefly at Gatsby's house with Nick. Gatsby seems to take some sort of pleasure in spending time with Tom, the same way that Tom takes some sort of perverse pleasure in spending time with his mistress's husband. Tom and Daisy find themselves later at one of Gatsby's parties, and Gatsby parades Tom around, introducing him to various celebrities at his party, telling people that Tom is a famous polo player (a bizarre lie that appears to humiliate Tom). As usual, the goings-on at the party are socially bankrupt. Tom is suspicious of Gatsby as a person, and in his relations to Daisy.

As the party winds down, Nick and Gatsby are alone for the most part. Gatsby talks to Nick about how he wants things between him and Daisy to be just like they were 4 or 5 years before.

#### Chapter 7
This is the big one broh.

It's a swelteringly hot summer day, and Gatsby has abruptly stopped throwing his hilariously lavish parties, has fired and replaced all his butlers, and is letting his house turn into a pigsty. Daisy has been coming over to visit Gatsby almost every afternoon for the last few weeks. Gatsby and Nick have been invited over to Daisy and Tom's house for lunch; Jordan tags along too.

The visit is very tense from the beginning. When Tom is away on the phone for a couple minutes (presumably talking to Myrtle), Gatsby and Daisy sneak in a few kisses, and Daisy introduces Gatsby to her toddler-aged daughter. After Tom comes back into the room, Daisy gives Gatsby an offhanded compliment, and from Daisy's tone of voice and body language, Tom understands for sure that Daisy and Gatsby are having an affair. Tom angrily orders that everyone ought to go downtown together to have a nice lunch, and things just go downhill from there; Daisy, Tom, and Gatsby bicker nonstop about small details as the sweltering heat crushes all 5 people. Daisy and Gatsby drive downtown in Tom's car, and the other 3 take Gatsby's. As they're driving down, they stop at the car shop beloning to Tom's mistress's husband, Mr. Wilson, for gas. Wilson is upset to the point of physical illness because he has finally started to suspect his wife's infidelity, and - under the watchful eyes of T.J Eckelburg that peer down from a billboard - he tells Tom that he's going to take Myrtle and move west. Tom manages to hide his devistation, and Myrtle watches the whole scene from a balcony in the garage; she mistakes Jordan to be Tom's wife.

> [Tom's] wife and mistress, until an hour ago secure and inviolate, were slipping precipitately from his control.

After more bickering about what the group ought to do, they end up renting a hotel room in the city together and make cocktails, where the major confrontation between Gatsby, Daisy, and Tom finally happens.

>[Tom:] "I want to know what Mr. Gatsby has to tell me"
>"Your wife doesn't love you," said Gatsby. "She's never loved you. She loves me."

Throughout the confrontation, both Tom and Gatsby try to talk on behalf of Daisy. At Gatsby's urging, she tells Tom that she never loved him, before faltering and saying that she really did used to love Tom, but loves Gatsby now; she tells Tom that she's going to leave him for Gatsby. Tom goes on the offensive, tearing into Gatsby with rumors of Gatsby's criminality that Tom has substantiated to a small degree. As Gatsby tries to defend himself, Daisy begins to withdraw. Tom declares that Gatsby's "presumptuous little flirtation" is over, and invites Gatsby and Daisy to drive back together to Tom's house. They leave together, and it's unclear whether Daisy intends to leave Tom for Gatsby, or if Gatsby's desperate defenses against Tom's accusations of his criminality have dimished him in her eyes.

The narrative picks back up in the past tense in Mr. Wilson's garage. Mr. Wilson locked Myrtle in his office, intending to keep her there until they are ready to move. Somehow, she gets out of the locked room and, furious at Mr. Wilson, runs into the street where she's hit by a car and killed instantly. Maybe ten minutes or so after the accident, Jordan, Tom, and Nick see the commotion as they're driving back. Tom is devistated at Myrtle's death, but her husband is downright catatonic. A bystander is telling the cops that a yellow coupe hit Myrtle, when Tom realizes that he had been driving Gatsby's car downtown earlier in the day when they stopped for gas. It seems like Gatsby's car matches the description of the car that hit Myrtle, and Tom is immediately worried that he will be implicated in the hit-and-run. Tom is apparently cleared, and he gruffly bullies some people into providing companionship for the devistated Mr. Wilson.

Once Tom, Nick and Jordan get back to the Buchanan's house, Daisy is inside and Tom offers that Jordan and Nick can go inside and have dinner in there by themselves, Jordan wants to take him up on the offer, but Nick is exhausted and sick of everyone (even sick of Jordan, he clarifies), and turns down the offer. As he waits for a taxi to take him home, he finds Gatsby lurking in the shrubs outside, waiting for Daisy to go to sleep. Nick finds out from Gatsby that it was indeed his car that hit and killed Myrtle, and that Daisy had been driving when it happened. Before going home, Nick wanders around the house perimeter and sees Tom and Daisy inside talking intimately with each other; it looks like they are going to try and repair their relationship.

#### Chapter 8
Nick goes to visit Gatsby, and gets a retelling of Gatsby's personal past with Daisy, but with some new truths laid bare. After the war, a clerical error lands Gatsby in Oxford for about 5 months. Daisy feels like she has been betrayed and abandoned, and because Gatsby doesn't come back fast enough, she begins a romance with Tom that ends in marriage before Gatsby can even leave Oxford. Considering Gatsby's humble upbringing, maybe there is a parallel between Gatsby/Daisy and George Wilson/Myrtle. Perhaps if Gatsby and Daisy's romance had gone forward at that time, Gatsby would never have pursued wealth, and Daisy would have had a midlife crisis about Gatsby's lack of wealth.

Nick leaves and talks on the phone with Jordan. With Nick feeling emotionally hollow in the wake of the Gatsby/Daisy situation, they end up breaking up.

The narrative briefly rewinds to the night before, and follows the vigil of Mr. Wilson's acquaintances as they stay up all night with him in the aftermath of his wife's death. In the morning, maybe around 8 or 9 am, Wilson slips away and goes out in search of the car that killed Myrtle. He somehow finds it in Gatsby's garage. Incorrectly thinking that Gatsby not only hit and killed Myrtle but was also carrying on an affair with her, Wilson kills Gatsby who was laying out in his pool. Wilson's body was found in the grass of Gatsby's yard.

#### Chapter 9
Nick tries to call Daisy to tell her about Gatsby's murder, but finds that she and Tom left earlier that afternoon with luggage, without telling anyone where they were going.

The narrator tries to get some people together for a funeral for Gatsby, but nobody is interested. Not Wolfsheim, not Gatsby's other shady business partners, and not any of the hundreds of people that used to show out for Gatsby's elaborate parties. The only people at Gatsby's burial are Nick and Gatsby's dad. A regular at Gatsby's parties (the one who remarked on the books in Gatsby's library back in chapter 3) shows up to the funeral late, but that's it.

A few months later, the narrator finds himself too distrubed by the Daisy/Gatsby incident and the surrounding superficiality and backbiting to continue living in New York. Before leaving, he decides to see Jordan one more time, who informs him that she's engaged to someone.

Just before he leaves the city, Nick runs into Tom downtown. Nick wastes no time in telling Tom what a piece of shit he thinks Tom is, and learns from Tom that Tom is the person who implicated Gatsby's car in Myrtle's death to Mr. Wilson. Nick reflects on the priviledge that Tom and Daisy's money gives them:

> They were careless people, Tom and Daisy - they smashed up things and creatures and then retreated back into their money or their vast carelessness, or whatever it was that kept them together, and let other people clean up the mess they had made...

The book ends with Nick laying out in the sand outside Gatsby's deserted mansion and ruminating on the futility of Gatsby's actions.
