May 28, 2020

I can't be too harsh on this book because T.R. Reid is still alive, but this book kinda sucks. I don't know why it's gotten so much critical acclaim.

This book weaves together a thread of American early semiconductor fabrication history together with a thread of technical computer architecture / VLSI explaination aimed at a complete layperson audience. I found the history chapters to be, by and large, boring slogs and the technical explaination chapters to be a blend of technically inaccurate and unnecessarily convoluted.  Nonetheless, the story it tells is an important one, and I did appreciate how the book introduced me to W. Edwards Deming, a pioneer in manufacturing reliability.

It's also worth pointing out that this book is a borderline masturbatory fantasy about 'great man history'. The truth is that for the entire decade of the 1950s, industrial expertise was slowly being built up to the point of 'the monolithic solution' being obvious. Kilby and Noyce were smart people and hard thinkers who tapped into the right knowledge sources at the right time; their nearly simultaneous, parallel inventions of the IC concept are a testament to the fact that if they didn't figure it out, someone else would have in 1959 or 1960. They stood on the backs of other great discoveries.

#### Chapter 1 - "The Monolithic Idea"
When the transistor was made commonplace in the early 1950s, electrical designs started to blossom in complexity; tube-based designs may have had tens or hundreds of tubes, but unencumbered by tube failure rates and heat dissipation, designers wanted to use transistors by the thousands and tens of thousands. This lead to a problem of manufacturing: how do you wire all the damn things together? This problem, called the tyranny of numbers, was the biggest open challenge in engineering during the 50s; it severely restricted the development of medical, military, consumer, and scientific instrumentation alike.

In parallel sparks of insight, 2 Americans seperately developed techniques in 1958/1959 to deal with the tyranny of numbers. Jack Kilby, a brand-new Texas Instruments hire, came up with the idea during a 3-week stretch when (literally) every other employee in his office was on 1958 summer vacation. Robert Noyce, one of the "traitorous 8" who split from transistor inventor Shockley's lab 3 years earlier to found Fairchild Semiconductor, came up with the idea with help from colleagues Moore and Hoerni. 'The idea' of course, was the 'monolithic idea', the basis for VLSI; Kilby and Noyce were already manufacturing thousands of transistors on wafers and slicing them up, only to pay technicians to wire them back together. Why not just 'print' wires directly on top of the wafers, and skip the part where you cut the wafers up and wire them back together?

#### Chapter 2 - "The Will to Think"
An unlikely character in this story, Thomas Edison managed the lab that first produced a vaccum-tube based rectifier in 1883 by accident while developing lightbulbs. As it didn't hold immediate commercial potential, Edison himself didn't care about the discovery, but physicists realized that important secrets lurked in the operation of such a strange device. By 1897, Cambridge physics professor JJ Thomson had posited the existance of the electron by using cathode-ray tubes derived from Edison's rectifier. Thomson's experiments upended existing notions of particle physics (which were very primitive), and began to lay the groundwork for the semiconductor physics that would come in about 50 years. Circa 1905, scientist John Fleming recognized the potential of Edison's rectifier as a radio reciever element, and soon after that, eccentric and mildly self-important inventor Lee DeForest invented the amplifying vaccum tube, changing radio immediately. In a legal incident that's funny in hindsight, DeForest was prosecuted for mail fraud when he claimed to investors in 1913 that real-time transatlantic voice communication was looming. DeForest was narrowly acquitted, and only 2 years later, his prediction came true due in large part to his own efforts.

Tubes, however, are hot, slow, energy intensive, expensive, and have high failure rates, leading military and commercial interests alike to seek replacements. Working with insights granted by the newly-matured field of quantum mechanics in post-WWII America, 3 Bell labs scientists, William Shockley, Walter Brittain, and John Bardeen, strived to show what Shockley had suspected since about 1940: that a solid-state amplifier could be made from semiconductor crystals. Shockley was the manager of the group, and wasn't very involved in the day-to-day experimenting but had critical vision and understanding; Brittain acted as the experimentalist, and Bardeen as the theorist. After about 2 years of work, they had the first-ever transistor, a fragile, mechanically finnicky device that would only work right if the pressure between some carefully spaced gold wires and a block of doped germanium was just right, a job that was left to Brittain's sensitive experimentalist's hands. The idea was quickly refined and within just a couple years, rugged transistors were being sold on the market, decimating the tube industry in a matter of years. All 3 men would be forever remembered for their genius, but Shockley might be remembered best for his mental descent into spreading racist ideas about white superiority during the twilight of his career as an elder statesman of semiconductor physics.

#### Chapter 3 - "A Nonobvious Solution"
Kilby was someone who came up with out-of-the-box solutions from the start of his career. After making some novel contributions to electronics manufacturing in the mid-50s for a company called Centralab, he moved to Texas Instruments so he could use TI's larger pool of resources to attack the largest open problem in engineering - the tyranny of numbers. Still hot on the heels of an earlier success to make transistors out of silicon instead of germanium, TI was working on an army-supported minituarization technique called 'project tinkertoy' that still relied on human labor to wire components. Because Kilby knew he would be assigned to it and knew that it would fail, he quickly started working on his own solution to the tyranny of numbers. His "monolithic idea" is first recorded in his notebook in July 24, 1958 with the realization that resistors and capacitors can be made of silicon with the same fabrication techniques as transistors. Kilby didn't get around to figuring out how circuit elements could be easily interconnected, but he was able to persuade his superiors to divert resources from the army-backed micromodule project to make a prototype device. Less than 2 months later, on september 12, 1958, Kilby demonstrated an oscillator made with his process, but still requiring hand-soldered wires between circuit elements.

#### Chapter 4 - "Leap of Insight"
Noyce and Fairchild's 7 other founders had worked at William Shockley's startup, Shockley Semiconductor Labs, but split after only 2 years there due to horrendously incompetent management on Shockley's part. They started Fairchild so they could work on manufacturing double-diffusion transistors, but they also made other advances at Fairchild. Building on the "planar process" invented by colleague Jean Hoerni [and surface passivisation developed by Mohamed Atalla, who's not mentioned in this book], Fairchild Semiconductor founder and 'rennaisance man' Robert Noyce develops an idea similar to Kilby's in January 1959, but does one better than Kilby, as he and Hoerni use Atalla's passivation technique to deposit metal traces on top of the oxide layer, removing the need for Kilby's hand-soldered wires. Noyce made this innovation without knowing about Kilby's invention 6 months earlier.

#### Chapter 5 - "Kilby v. Noyce"
TI began to hear rumblings that Fairchild had come up with an idea similar to Kilby's, so they raced to patent their idea. Kilby still hadn't fleshed out a solution to the interconnect problem, but he had their patent lawyer add a paragraph to the application, describing something Noyce's interconnect process in a vagueness commensurate with his experimental experience with such a technique. Noyce filed a similar patent about 5 months after Kilby, in July 1959. A ten-year legal battle unfurled, hinging on TI's imprecise language surrounding interconnects, but also on the fact that Kilby had beaten Noyce to the punch. When the dust settled 10 years later, Noyce was granted the patent, but it hardly mattered. Before the first blows of the legal battle had really been traded, Kilby and Noyce reached a point of mutal respect, and their respective institutions agreed to split technology licensing fees regardless of the legal outcome so that the industry could get cracking on designing and manufacturing integrated circuits!

#### Chapter 6 - "The Real Miracle"
[The author stumbles through a layperson level explanation of data representation in digital computers. I commend the author - a journalist and filmmaker by trade - for doing so much research about a technical topic, but I wish he had spent more time with professional engineers going over this section. It's a layperson explaining technical ideas to other laypeople. The ideas themselves aren't that difficult, but the author both overcomplicates them and gets them largely wrong.]

#### Chapter 7 - "Blasting off"
Integrated Circuits experienced surprisingly slow market adoption. They generated little hubbub at trade shows in 1960 and 1961, and were far, far too expensive for common use. The [first commercially available integrated circuit](https://web.archive.org/web/20110720225257/http://www.computerhistory.org/semiconductor/timeline/1960-FirstIC.html), introduced by Fairchild in 1961 under the name "μLogic", was a single, on-bit flip-flop that retailed for $120 (just over $1000 in 2020 money). The young industry was kept afloat by NASA and military contracts, who were willing to pay outsized sums for the extraordinarily tiny chips. Between NASA and the military, Fairchild and TI had over $100 million in IC revenue from 1961 - 1965 (in 60's dollars). This allowed the cost of their chips to plummet exponentially AS the chips increased in transistor count, and by the time the decade was out, a circuit orders of magnitude more complex than the sort of flip-flop that Fairchild had retailed for $120 in 1961 would retail for about $1.50 (see page 151/2).

A few, including Noyce and Moore broke off of Fairchild in 1968ish to manufacture memory chips. Because of the precieved cheapness and high-density of magnetic core memory, many people precieved this to be a losing gamble. Indeed, Intel's first 2 chips were more expensive and lower-capacity than magnetic core memory and physically quite large compared to magnetic core memory, but the exponential transistor size scaling we all know so well allowed Intel's memory densities to take off, and by 1975 they had far outstripped magnetic core memory with a 16Kbit RAM.

The chapter closes with a reflection on the business paradoxes that IC fabrication brings up. Making ICs smaller makes them both cheaper to produce AND makes them better for the consumer in every way - they take less power, are faster, and are more portable. Most of the time, when a business decreases cost of manufacture, the consumer gets an inferior product. In this case, if cost of manufacture is decreased by shrinking feature size, consumer satisfaction with the same circuit can only be higher due to increased speed, battery life, and portability. I mean... if you were to fabricate the atari processor in 14 nm technology, that sucker would probably run at 2 GHz.

They also present another business paradox in that, in principle, they never break or wear out (of course, since the 80s when the first edition of this book was published, we've shrunk feature size to a point where electromigration will cause circuits to wear out after 30 or 40 years). How can a business sell a product that never wears out? By constantly introducing new and better versions of it or new types of it.

#### Chapter 8 - "The Implosion"
In 1965, Haggerty - the TI manager who made TI's silicon transistor a household item in 1954 with a portable, battery-powered, transistorized radio (a portable radio would have seemed like unreasonable science fiction 10 years earlier) - comes up with a similar scheme to make integrated circuits a household item: he asks Kilby, now a risen star in TI, to manage a team to make an IC-based calculator. This seems just as far-fetched in 1965 as a portable radio would have seemed in 1953: calculators are desk-sized affairs that gulp massive amounts of power from AC wall sockets and retail for $1,200. Haggerty asks Kilby to produce a battery-powered, pocket sized calculator that can retail for about $100. The final design comprised about 500 logic gates spread over 4 ICs. The ICs designed by Kilby's team weren't enough to miniaturaize the calculator; the display was also an issue, which Kilby solved by using a thermal printer. Although the original prototype was functional by mid-1966, manufacturing complications meant it took 5 years to get to commercial production. Incredibly, TI sold over 5 million calculators in 1972.

In 1969, Intel was contracted by Japanese calculator manufacturer Busicom to design a set of ICs to drive a new, smaller calculator. Thinking that the creation of ASICs for each application (which is what Busicom was asking for) would be untenable within the industry, Noyce and the engineer assigned to the project decided instead to make a general purpose CPU which could be programmed to fulfill Busicom's application requirements. Busicom was given a bargain on the chips themselves, but Intel kept the rights for the distribution of the chip, a 4-bit processor that was dubbed the Intel 4004; it retailed for $200 in 1971. TI quickly followed suit with their own processor, and by the mid-70s, microprocessors were commonplace, embedded in traffic lights, medical equipment, and consumer computers in a small but growing personal computer market.

#### Chapter 9 - "DIM - I"
[Another attempt to explain computer architecture. Sorry man, it's just not that good. If you're reading this, T. R. Reid, talk to me and I can help you rewrite chapters 9 and 6 for the next edition of the book.]

#### Chapter 10 - "Sunset, Sunrise"
The one where Japanese IC manufacturers beat the shit out of American IC manufacturers during the late 70s and early 80s by adopting statistical quality control processes. This is one of the most valuable chapters of the book IMO, but with a mild sheen of xenophobia that's not too bad... for a book whose first edition was in 1981.

The chapter also discusses W. Edwards Deming's pioneering quality control methods, and their effect on Japanese manufacture of tech products.  Deming first went to Japan right after WWII in 1947 (?) to help the united states carry out the Japanese Census. While he was there, he was invited to speak to the Union of Japanese Scientists and Engineers about statistical quality control methods. Although he was badly recieved in the United States, Japanese manufacturers looking to rebuild their society after their devistating defeat in WWII took a gamble on Deming's methods and adopted them wholeheartedly. By the early 60s, Japanese corporations were breaking into the American monochrome TV market, a possibility that had been long dismissed by American TV makers; according to the Japanese manufacturers, Deming's quality-control techniques made their products much higher-quality than American products. By the mid-70s, the Japanese began to apply these techniques to the semiconductor industry, repeating their earlier success in the TV industry. Japanese corporations were producing chips similar to American ones, but they had lower failure rates. Facing potential extinction at the hands of Japanese IC manufacturers, American manufacturers decided that they had to step up their quality control.

#### Chapter 11 - "The Patriarchs"
After their convergence with the invention of the IC, Kilby and Noyce take very different paths through the end of their lives.

Noyce became a high-powered executive at Intel, bucking management tradition by staying in a cubicle equivalent to those that his engineers worked in. As Intel's fortunes took off, Noyce's net worth climbed into the billions, and he shifted his focus to venture capitalism. Noyce also worked tirelessly to get American IC manufacturers to regain the ground they lost to Japanese manufacturers in the 80s; he was the first head of Sematech, a multi-company semiconductor consortium founded to push American IC fabrication methods forward. Until he died of a heart attack in 1990, he used is fortune to indulge his many different unique, 'renassance-man' hobbies including skiing, racecar driving, and gardening.

Kilby hung around at Texas Instruments, his invention making him royalty there. After another decade or so at TI, Kilby decided to become an independant consultant, working on projects of his choosing and filing patents for consumer-grade electronic gadgets. In his later years, much to TI's pleasure, he regularly haunted their campus, happily talking with younger engineers about their design issues. Kilby never seeked out recognition, but was awarded a Nobel prize in 2000; once his 1-week, lavisy trip to Sweden for the prize ceremony was concluded, interest in him gradually evaporated, which was something that suited him very well. He retains his celebrity status at TI and at Japanese semiconductor manufacturers.
